While many people criticize the film industry
for offering bombastic, violent or vacuous programming,
I would like to applaud those producers who
are making a difference in the world with
offerings such as The Constant Gardner,
Ceriana, Good night and Good Luck, and other films
that give us a glimpse of a world hidden from view.
Film maker Robert Greenwald is among those brave producers
who dare to speak out.
His documentaries Out Foxed and Uncovered: The Iraq War,
paved the way for his newest film, Walmart:
The High Cost of Low Price.
So you've been in the film and television scene
for about 30 years now from the beginning right?
Well, yeah, I think, more than 30 probably.
Yeah, looking at your bio,
it's impressive.
So you've been working regularly at this
and I've noticed that throughout
your career there have been little spots
where you've done content that
would be considered consciousness raising,
a little bit controversial and so forth.
Has this been incidental or have you been
building up to where you are now all along?
Well, it's a good question.
I think, at least for me,
I never have a plan or a master plan.
I go, what interests me?
What grabs my attention?
What's possible?
I mean, film, it's not like writing a novel.
You can't make whatever film you want.
You know, there's all those realities at there.
I think in general, I've always been interested
in true stories even when I did the 50 some odd
narrative films with actors,
I think 40, 45 of them are based
on a real story or a real incident or something like that.
So I think the evolution to documentaries
has been inevitable looking back on it.
And most of them had something of substance
in them, not all of them.
There are some duds in there that I would
like to take off the resume,
but that happens.
I'm sure it happens.
So now you're sort of taking the tiger by the tail
as it were.
You've gone in the most recent movie out there,
which I've seen a couple of times, by the way,
the Walmart movie.
The High Cost of Low Price Goods.
What was your inspiration in going
in this direction and Walmart specifically?
Well, a friend of mine was working there
and talking to him, I started to find out about
how bad they are from his point of view.
And then as I started doing research,
a couple of things really jumped out at me.
One was the Walton family,
worth a hundred billion dollars,
juxtapose that with the fact they don't give
health care to people.
And that's such an emotional issue for me.
Every time I go to the doctor,
I'm aware of how lucky I am to be able to afford it
and the fact that people with so much money
that they could burn it won't give people
the freedom to take care of themselves
just made me furious.
And just to be clear on that,
they have health care, but it's not the kind
that necessarily is helpful to a person
making minimum wage.
They have health care that's outside
the range of a lot of the employees
and then even when they can afford it,
it's very limited in the choices it's offered.
And their own internal survey that
was leaked a few months ago,
indicated the single biggest dissatisfaction
among their employees is over the health care.
And over 50% of their employees
don't have any, so they wind up going to the government.
Yeah, government subsidized health care
as an employee of Walmart.
The film was really quite moving.
I haven't gone there.
I live in a small town where that's kind of the only
retailer around because everything else
has been closed down.
I certainly haven't gone there since seeing
the film.
You're really striking at the heart of what
were solid American values and we've
let go because we all want cheap goods.
We've certainly seen the destructive
thing of Walmart in small towns
and closing up shops and all.
I think that it's been a systemic attack
by large corporations on a lot
of what we believe in,
that's exactly what you say,
good American values,
and it's an issue that cuts across all political lines.
And I was astounded and moved by the stories
that we came up with because they were so different.
And at some point I thought I'd never finish the movie.
I have 380 hours because Walmart
abuses in so many areas.
We'd get one thing and they'd say
oh have you heard about this?
I'd say oh no, please, don't.
And then they'd say have you heard about this?
It just kept growing and growing and growing.
Well you certainly made a pretty complex portrait.
I think you covered a lot of issues in the documentary
which hopefully everybody, by the time they've finished
this interview, will purchase.
You've made it very affordable to people.
I wanted to talk to you about the way
in which you went about getting this out to the public,
because this seems to be a new movement that's going on.
Can you talk about what your strategy was?
It ended up in no time flat,
something like 7,000 living rooms.
So tell us what you had in mind,
how you did this.
Well, I'll just backtrack it a little bit,
because it started with the other films I did, Uncovered,
which is about the reasons for the war and Out Foxed,
about Fox news.
Fabulous documentary.
Thank you.
And what we found with each of the films,
by virtue of necessity was how we're going to get them
out there, how we're going to get them out there quickly,
and we're going to reach people who
either disagree with us or don't care.
Well, you can't move quickly by going through
traditional gate keepers, good or bad.
You mean the Hollywood Film
distribution industry?
I mean yeah, traditional, movie theaters,
television networks, cable companies.
They just move at a slower pace, number one,
and number two, if you go strictly traditional,
it's going to be harder to reach
the people who are disagreeing with you.
I mean, let's think about it for a minute,
and again, I only realized this after the fact,
but who's going to spend eight, nine or ten dollars
to see a documentary with a point of view
that you radically disagree with?
Not going to happen.
But it's playing at your church,
your neighbor says come over,
a member of your family who you can't stand politically
says sit down and watch this,
and that's a whole other story.
And that's what we've discovered, again,
with each film making more in roads
and then with the Walmart movie,
our organizers started before I started shooting anything.
She was there first, Lisa Smithline, was right down
in the corner office here
and she started working the groups
and calling and spreading the word
and so we opened in a thousand churches
and then we had a student screening in
every state in the nation,
environmentalists did screenings,
women's groups did screenings,
labour did screenings,
I mean it just went on and on and on.
Uniquely, as I say, because Walmart has offended
so many people.
Small businesses, you know, communities.
But it was a great way to get the film out quickly,
to get it to all these groups,
and then people buy the DVDs,
they go to Walmartmovie.com, our website,
they get it and they become an organizer.
It is true.
I found out about it initially on the internet.
I had gotten an email,
I don't remember which group it could have been,
moveon.org, I don't know who it was actually now,
but immediately became engaged in it
and you brought the public into the process
of even helping select the title,
so people felt as though they were a part of this.
Now again, what were you trying to achieve in that?
Well, in terms of distribution,
I was using what was available to me,
which is the internet, and then as I've read a lot,
now I'm a technological idiot, so it's fascinating
at least to me and my family,
that I'm using the internet so heavily,
but in all the reading I've done,
what I've learned was that it's an interactive medium.
In other words, it's not just a megaphone
to speak to people.
And the more you interact the better you are,
so out of that grew regular email letters
that I sent people, a blog of my own,
and various ways that they could participate,
including naming our company,
which is Brave New Films and naming
the title of the movie, Walmart: The High Cost of Low Price.
And we plan to go further with that in the future,
on future films.
Now we have field producers, we have 1,200 people
around the world who signed up to volunteer.
They shot photos for the film,
they shot videos for the film,
they distributed the film,
they wrote press releases,
it's amazing.
So it really belongs to the people
in a sense as well.
Oh, totally.
And this is grass roots,
which when you look at Out Foxed, for example,
look at the way the media is being manipulated,
and there are a few shining stars
that are rising above that, but not too many.
This is really looking like the future way
of distribution of information.
Well, it certainly is a great way to do it
and the way that I'm committed to and
everybody finds different ways,
but the tendency, the trend, where anybody
can make a video and put it up on Google now,
I think it's really an extraordinary time that
we will look back on in five, ten years
and say can you remember when?
And the old ways are going to just totally disappear
in very quick order.
It is, it's very exciting.
How do your peers feel about what you're doing
when a lot of them are still going in the
traditional way?
Well, the ones who talk to me,
because there are many who don't,
but the ones who talk to me are excited
because they all realize the possibility.
Content aside, whether you do political,
whether you don't, whether you agree with me
or disagree with me, content aside,
just as a distribution way,
it's very clear with CBS making available Lost and
Desperate Housewives for downloading
on your iPod, you know.
So we're in a revolution.
This interview will be available on your
video iPod and Google.
So that...
There's no going backwards.
I'm fortunate and thrilled to be at the front end
of some of this stuff and we're continuing to explore
how we continue to do that.
The meeting I just left was with Jim Gillian,
who's done a lot of the great work for us,
you know, dreaming and scheming and
thinking about what are the next steps
that we want to keep doing.
From an activism point of view,
obviously you did this so people would make
decisions, choices, take action.
What have been some of the inspirational
stories and actions that have come out of the
airing of this movie?
Well, there's a couple.
One thing is we immediately started getting
letters from people who were fighting Walmart,
site fights they call them,
where there are coalitions resisting Walmart
moving into their community.
People who were using it,
people who were getting multiple copies,
and then one city counsel overturned
the decision.
Now, it wasn't strictly because of the film,
the important thing is the film is married
to the groups who are doing the work.
And that's the other shift,
in other words, I love going to the movies,
I love going to the movie theater,
I love buying my popcorn,
but with these films, I've made a commitment
to connect them with the groups
and the groups take them and make use of them
because the groups and the people
on the ground are going to create the social change.
So with that in mind, and again,
I don't want it to seem it's all the film,
hard working groups around the country
are using it and it's helping tip over a city counsel vote,
or it's helping bring a community together and say
we didn't know that, we've got to stop that
from happening,
or get a church involved or a student group involved.
We're getting letters and emails about that all the time.
It's extraordinary.
What about fall out?
Have you encountered any unpleasantness as a result
of it?
Walmart can't be too pleased about it.
You know, I keep waiting for them to invite me
on the board of directors, it hasn't happened,
and I keep waiting for them to sell the movie
in Walmart, but it still hasn't happened.
Not happening either.
No, it's surprising.
They've been attacking me pretty heavily.
But, you know, that comes with the job
if one is going to take this on.
That comes with the job if one is going to take this on,
I think it would be naive to assume you're not
going to get attacked.
It's never fun, but it's inevitable
in these cases and again, at Walmartmovie.com,
we posted all the attacks they did on me
and all the attacks on the film,
and it just comes with the territory.
In a way, it almost strengthens
your case.
Well, it certainly, one expects it.
Right, right.
You got a lot of media coverage too when you
first came out with this as I understand.
Where you not on the morning show circuit,
network level?
Can you tell a little bit about some of
the media attention you got and how it
was treated in the media?
Was it fair and balanced, the treatment of it?
Well, other than the New York Post calling me
a Nazi film maker, I think it was,
and Bill O'Rielly doing his usual insults,
for the most part it was pretty good actually.
There was a lot of press attention all over the world.
I just came back from ten days in London.
Yeah, you look very fresh.
I know you're still jet lagged.
Yeah, Ireland and Scotland
and it continues because it is a story
that affects people's lives and it is a story
that there are no easy, natural, political breaks on.
Now, having said that, there are certainly places
that Walmart advertises heavily that
we would've like to have had more receptivity to us,
but again, I think that's expected.
But we have probably 300, because the press agents,
there was like 300 pages of articles
and just a ton of TV and radio.
So it's been positive because that's part of the job
with these films, right?
Which is to help tell a story that isn't
being told and then to the degree
that the media finds it interesting,
then it becomes told to even more people.
Do you have any idea
how what the reach has been so far?
I know it's hard because it's in living rooms
and churches and in our case,
we played it in the town library for everybody.
I mean, Walmart Week, where we had over
8,000 screenings, conservatively we estimated
700,000 people saw it just in that week.
So we've got to be in the millions by now.
Fabulous.
Now you have this other project in conjunction
with the ACLU.
Now that is going to be airing over the course of...
One year, it's one a month,
it's on Link TV and it's on Court TV.
And it's also available online
and on DVD?
Yep.
And this is Freedom Files.
Yes.
And I took a look at some of the topics
and I've seen just a few clips off the site,
but the number one is to Beyond the Patriot Act.
Can you just,
I know you don't have time to discuss all ten parts,
but can you do a little flipping through
what we can expect to see in this
and really what some of the profound
moments for you were in this project?
Well, first of all, let me just say that
Jeremy Keagan who directed and produced them
really did the lion's share and his team,
of the heavy lifting.
Anthony Romero who's the head of the ACLU
is a visionary who I'm proud to call a friend,
and we've been talking for a while about using
the media to tell their story more.
It's certainly one thing to reach the lawyers
and that group but civil liberty stories
are very personal stories that affect all of us.
So we found a whole series of these half hour shows
which go into how you are affected by the
Patriot act or racial profiling
and how it affects people around the country,
or gay rights, or women's rights,
or student issues or how a case gets to the
Supreme Court, but always doing it with the point
of view of human personal interactions.
And from that point of view, frankly, I think again
whatever your politics, it makes very gripping
and involving television.
Just the little bits I've seen,
I watched a little bit on the racial profiling,
for example, another one which is kind of
interesting, I wouldn't say it's a double edged sword,
but it's religious freedom.
Now people think of the ACLU,
ok, you can't do your, you know, god bless America,
etc., anymore in school.
Yet at the some time, they're also there to protect
the religious expression of any and every group.
Can you talk about just that issue a little bit
so people get an idea more about what the ACLU
is trying to get across?
Well, the ACLU, like many groups
in our culture, gets boiled down to a sentence
or a phrase and they are much more than that,
and in the religious freedom show it shows a young man
who I think is a very religious catholic who was
going for some counseling and they were insisting that
he go to a baptist counselor of some kind in his school.
So the ACLU was in the position of defending
his right as a strong believer in Catholic religion
not to have to be forced to go in with a baptist counselor.
And I found that just fascinating because
it's what you were saying, here they are defending
the rights of the people to have their religious choice,
not putting them in the narrow box that they're
against them, which they're not.
What about racial profiling?
Can you talk a little bit about that
because that's now really turning out to be
one of the most incendiary issues
and it could even be something that
we could say is responsible for some of the
shootings of policemen and such in California
that's going on these days.
What did you find there?
What we found in racial profiling,
first and most important, whether it was African American
or Muslim, it doesn't work.
In other words, what they're doing is they're arresting
lots of innocent people by creating a simplistic profile
and saying if you are a Muslim you are
under suspicion or if you are an African American
driving his car along here, you are under suspicion.
Now what happens when you arrest innocent people,
or target innocent people is not just that you're
going against what many Americans believe in,
but the bad guys are getting away.
I mean think about that for a minute.
Every time you throw a wide net and whoever
falls into you grab, which is basically
what racial profiling is,
it's the simple man's ineffective way
of going after bad guys versus,
wait a minute, we've got information on this person
or that person, we've done research, we have police work.
For every time you throw the wide net and
you just grab who falls through,
the people who are really committing the crimes
are over here getting away and that's a disaster.
So we try to make that clear in the episode
as well as bringing home to people
that these Muslims or these African Americans,
they are us.
They are people, hard-working, and caring,
and committed Americans.
They are us.
And that's not what our country should be about.
And plus it's creating very deep resentments
among families and cultures, neighborhoods, communities
and I think we're starting to see some of the repercussions
of that on a large scale even.
What about free speech?
This is a big one.
I was noticing in one of them just kind of going
through it briefly.
Maybe you can explain what that segment was about
that had allocated free speech zones.
What's up with free speech zones?
We're suppose to have free speech everywhere.
Where you step out of the zone and you can't
have free speech.
It was focused on the conventions where they
decided that they were going to put people in pens,
literally, and that's where they could exercise free speech.
Can you imagine if we read about this going on
in another country?
How outraged we would be here?
How dare they do that?
Well, it was happening here at the republican and
the democratic conventions, both and
the ACLU, to their credit, was resisting that,
saying no, that's not what we should be about.
Free speech is one of the really critically
important rights that we have in this country
and we need to protect that.
So, what did you learn around
the subject of free speech,
other than that one situation?
I learned in different cases...
In terms of abuses
and what's really going on,
what rights have been stripped away
as a result of the Patriot act and so forth?
Well, I think, I mean, there's the Patriot act
which was it's own show, as you went into,
and then there was the free speech,
so I think in addition to the political conventions,
the thing that was most shocking to me
was this young man on the internet
who had created this encyclopedia.
And they were essentially, because he had some words
that could have been misinterpreted,
were starting to impinge on his right to exercise
free speech and again what we're trying to do
is say these are basic to who we are
as a people, who we are as a country,
and all of us need to protect them.
Because there is a tendency to think,
well that doesn't really affect me
and I'm not out there protesting at that convention
or I'm not out there doing this stuff on the internet,
but you know, then it becomes
what kind of country do we want?
And what are we going to do about it?
Right.
So what are you looking at...
Obviously, you've gotten yourself right in the middle
of the most heated issues of the time.
What are you looking at down the road?
Any upcoming projects that we should be looking for?
Well, look for them.
But the one thing that I've learned with the Walmart movie
and the Fox movie is there's a great value in keeping
them secret until the last minute.
But we'll be announcing our first film that we didn't make
that's some outside film makers made in early March
and you can look for that.
And then if we can raise the funding,
there'll be another film that I will do
by the fall.
We're trying to fundraise around that
that will arouse people's passions.
Ok, so they are somewhat political
or social in nature?
Yes, yes they are.
Definitely.
Very.
Well, you have me sitting on the edge
of my chair, I can't wait to hear what's next.
Good.
I know you're very busy
and you're jet lagged and thank you so much
for taking the time to spend with us.
It's my pleasure, sorry I couldn't spend more.
If every there was a time to begin paying attention
to what Hollywood has to say, it may be now.
Meanwhile, just go to his website
and pick up a copy of the film to share with your
friends or family.
Until next time, thanks for watching.